# Why do we need a computational taxonomy?

There is a consensus that viruses are so diverse that no single
taxonomic method can be used to classify them all (Simmonds et
al. PLoS Biology 2023). Since its inception, the ICTV has been seeking
the expertise of the global virology community to classify viruses in
accordance with their domain-specific knowledge. This has generated a
patchwork of methods that, ideally, capture the features of different
viral lineages and generate meaningful taxa that are in agreement with
biology. These methods are formalised in taxonomy proposals
(taxoprops) written by experts and ratified by the ICTV. These
documents describe how viruses within each taxon shall be classified,
and include specific demarcation criteria. They are available as Word
documents on the ICTV website.

As metagenomics is rapidly expanding our view of the virosphere, we
are looking to make sense of the sequences we discover. The number and
diversity of sequences found in viromics dataset is staggering and
make their taxonomic classification a daunting task that one would
ideally automate. There is currently no ICTV-approved method to
approach this question. While the solution will likely not be trivial,
we have to face this challenge to keep up with the growth of viruses
that we aim to classify.

The demarcation criteria are quite diverse and not encoded in a
machine-readable way. We envision a future where the demarcation
criteria for all taxoprops are implemented in reproducible
computational pipelines, allowing viral sequences to be readily
classified into taxa at all ranks. The virology experts, including
ICTV Study Group members, use specialised methods for taxonomic
classification of their viruses. However, these methods might not be
readily reproducible by others. At the same time, bioinformaticians
develop automated tools that can be readily installed and run, but
might not be able to classify all viruses consistently with the
virology experts. Through this ICTV/EVBC Workshop on Automating Virus
Taxonomy, we propose to reinforce the links between these expertises,
and explore ideas for encoding the demarcation criteria in a
reproducible way so that they can be applied at a large scale.

# The methodology

# The dataset

